Settings Reference
==================

Settings configure code generation. They are written at the top of the grammar
file, before any productions, one per line.

.. note::

   The settings and defaults in this chapter were verified against the
   CongoCC source (``AppSettings.java``). Because CongoCC is released as a
   rolling build, treat a setting marked here against a date as current as of
   that date.

Writing settings
----------------

A setting is a name, an optional value, and a semicolon. The name is
case-insensitive. The value may be omitted for a boolean (a bare name means
*true*):

.. code-block:: ccc

   FAULT_TOLERANT;                       // boolean shorthand for = true
   SMART_NODE_CREATION = false;          // boolean
   TAB_SIZE = 4;                         // integer
   PARSER_PACKAGE = org.example.lang;    // package name
   DEFAULT_LEXICAL_STATE = JSON;         // bare identifier
   EXTRA_TOKENS = INDENT, DEDENT;        // comma-separated list

An unrecognized setting is not an error; CongoCC emits a warning — *"The option
X is not recognized and will be ignored."* — and continues. A few settings can
also be supplied or overridden on the command line; see :doc:`invocation`.

Naming and output
-----------------

``BASE_NAME``
   *String. Default: derived from the grammar file name.* Base for the
   generated class names — ``BASE_NAME = Foo`` yields ``FooParser`` and
   ``FooLexer``.

``PARSER_CLASS``
   *String. Default:* ``<BASE_NAME>Parser``. Name of the generated parser
   class.

``LEXER_CLASS``
   *String. Default:* ``<BASE_NAME>Lexer``. Name of the generated lexer class.

``PARSER_PACKAGE``
   *String. Default: the lower-cased parser class name.* Package for the parser
   and lexer.

``NODE_PACKAGE``
   *String. Default:* ``<PARSER_PACKAGE>.ast``. Package for the generated
   syntax-tree node classes.

``ROOT_API_PACKAGE``
   *Package name. Default: unset.* When this is set, we do *not* generate base API
   such as ``Node`` (with its sub-interfaces ``Node.TerminalNode`` and ``Node.NodeType``)
   but, rather, the code generated from this grammar *piggy-backs* off of the base
   Node API generated by another grammar. This setting specifies the ``PARSER_PACKAGE``
   of that other grammar. This allows various sub-projects (each with their
   own CongoCC grammar) to *share* a common root ``Node`` ancestor, which means that the
   various nodes generated by different parsers can co-exist in a single parse tree.
   (This is simply not possible otherwise, since, in order for basic node traversal API,
   such as ``Node getParent()`` to work, the node subclasses have to have the common
   ``Node`` ancestor.) When this option is in effect, we also re-use the ``TokenSource``
   and ``ParseException`` classes from the other grammar's ``ROOT_API_PACKAGE``.
   For more detailed information on this, see `this post from the discussion forum
   <https://discuss.congocc.org/d/35-the-new-root-api-package-setting-for-polyglot-projects>`_

..
   This whole issue of multiple grammar/parsers co-existing really needs its own
   section, I think. (JR)

``BASE_NODE_CLASS``
   *String. Default:* ``BaseNode``. Base class for generated node classes.

``BASE_TOKEN_CLASS``
   *String. Default:* ``Token``. Base class for the generated token class.
   This option is mostly useful for *polyglot* projects, i.e. when a project
   encompasses multiple grammars/parsers.
   So a Token object that was vended by the java parser, say, could be ``JavaToken``
   while one vended by the python parser could be ``PythonToken``. That disposition
   would frequently be used in conjunction with the ``ROOT_API_PACKAGE`` setting.

``BASE_SRC_DIR``
   *String. Default:* ``"."``. Output directory, absolute or relative to the
   grammar file. ``OUTPUT_DIRECTORY`` is a synonym, and the ``-d`` command-line
   flag sets the same thing.

``NODE_PREFIX``
   *String. Default: empty.* A prefix applied to generated node class names.

``COPYRIGHT_BLURB``
   *String. Default: empty.* Text inserted as a comment at the top of each
   generated file.

Tree building
-------------

See :doc:`tree-building` for what these control.

``TREE_BUILDING_ENABLED``
   *Boolean. Default: true.* Master switch; when false, no tree-building code is
   generated and the other tree settings are ignored (with a warning).

``TREE_BUILDING_DEFAULT``
   *Boolean. Default: true.* Whether the parser builds a tree unless turned off
   at run time.

``TOKENS_ARE_NODES``
   *Boolean. Default: true.* Whether tokens are included in the tree as
   terminal nodes.

``UNPARSED_TOKENS_ARE_NODES``
   *Boolean. Default: false.* Whether unparsed (special) tokens, such as
   comments, are included as nodes. Requires ``TOKENS_ARE_NODES``.

..
   (Let's not even tell people about this.)
   ``SPECIAL_TOKENS_ARE_NODES`` is a legacy synonym read only as a fallback.

``SMART_NODE_CREATION``
   *Boolean. Default: true.* When true, a production creates a node only if more
   than one node is on the stack, so trivial single-child productions do not
   add a level to the tree. This can be overridden by putting in explicit
   tree-building annotations.

``NODE_DEFAULT_VOID``
   *Boolean. Default: false.* When true, productions build no node unless they
   explicitly request one with a ``#`` descriptor.

``NODE_USES_PARSER``
   *Boolean. Default: false.* Generates node classes that hold a reference to
   the parser.

Lexical
-------

See :doc:`lexical` and :doc:`tokenization-advanced`.

``DEFAULT_LEXICAL_STATE``
   *Identifier. Default:* ``DEFAULT``. The lexical state the lexer starts in.
   Any tokens defined in this file, where the lexical state (or possibly states)
   was not explicitly stated are assumed to be in this lexical state.

``IGNORE_CASE``
   *Boolean. Default: false.* Makes the entire lexer case-insensitive. (Case can
   also be ignored per token production with ``[IGNORE_CASE]``.)

``REQUIRE_TOKEN_DECLARATION``
   *Boolean. Default: false.* When true, every token must be declared in a token
   production; an undeclared string literal used in a production is an error
   rather than an implicitly declared token.

   .. versionadded:: 2026-06-10

``DEACTIVATE_TOKENS``
   *List. Default: none.* Token names that start out inactive and must be
   switched on with ``ACTIVATE_TOKENS`` during parsing.

``EXTRA_TOKENS``
   *List. Default: none.* Synthetic token types not produced by the lexical
   grammar (for example ``INDENT``/``DEDENT`` inserted by a token hook). An
   entry may name its class as ``NAME#ClassName``.

``TOKEN_CHAINING``
   *Boolean. Default: false (auto-enabled if the grammar uses* ``preInsert`` *).*
   Generates extra code that allows synthetic tokens to be chained into the token stream.

``LEXER_USES_PARSER``
   *Boolean. Default: false.* Generates a lexer that holds a reference to the
   parser, for tightly coupled context-sensitive lexing.

Pre-lexical options
-------------------

``TAB_SIZE``
   *Integer. Default: 1.* Width to which tab characters are expanded in
   generated output. ``TABS_TO_SPACES`` is a synonym.

``PRESERVE_TABS``
   *Boolean. Default: true unless a tab size is set.* Keeps tab characters
   instead of expanding them. In this case, ``TAB_SIZE`` still has an effect.
   It is used to deduce the column offset of a token, which would be different
   based on whether you think tab stops are at 8 space intervals vs 4 spaces,
   for example.

``PRESERVE_LINE_ENDINGS``
   *Boolean. Default: false.* Preserves the input's line endings instead of
   normalizing them.

``ENSURE_FINAL_EOL``
   *Boolean. Default: false.* Appends a newline to the input to be parsed (if it is
   not already there.) Certain grammars (in particular ones that are line-oriented)
   are hard to write if you can't assume that every line terminates with an EOL --
   *including the final one*!

``TERMINATING_STRING``
   *String. Default: empty (or* ``"\n"`` *when* ``ENSURE_FINAL_EOL`` *is set).*
   A string appended to the input to be parsed. (If it is not already present.)

``JAVA_UNICODE_ESCAPE``
   *Boolean. Default: false.* (Java) Processes ``\u`` escapes in the input
   stream the way legacy JavaCC's ``JavaCharStream`` did.

Code Generation
---------------

``USE_CHECKED_EXCEPTION``
   *Boolean. Default: false.* Whether the generated ``ParseException`` is a
   checked exception. With this option set, all of the methods corresponding
   to BNF productions declare ``throws ParseException``.

``USES_PREPROCESSOR``
   *Boolean. Default: false.* With this option set, extra code is generated
   (particularly in `Token.java` and `TokenSource.java`)
   that supports the implementation of preprocessor functionality. Basically,
   regions of the input can be turned off in a pre-lexical step. See :doc:`grammar-file`.

..
   C_CONTINUATION_LINE was implemented for one guy who apparently needed it,
   but I don't know how generally useful it is. It might be better not to
   mention iy.

``C_CONTINUATION_LINE``
   *Boolean. Default: false.* Honors C-style backslash line continuations in the
   preprocessor.

..
   (I am loath to even tell people about these options that existed as
   a courtesy for existing users. The manual should be mostly oriented towards
   new users and there is no reason to tell people about these!)
   ``LEGACY_GLITCHY_LOOKAHEAD``
   *Boolean. Default: false.* Restores the quirky lookahead behavior of legacy
   JavaCC, for grammars that depended on it. See :doc:`appendices/legacy`.

  ``ASSERT_APPLIES_IN_LOOKAHEAD``
   *Boolean. Default: false.* Whether a plain ``ASSERT`` is also evaluated during
   lookahead (``ENSURE`` always is). See :doc:`disambiguation`.

Fault tolerance
---------------

See :doc:`fault-tolerance`.

``FAULT_TOLERANT``
   *Boolean. Default: false.* Enables the experimental fault-tolerant parsing
   mode.

``FAULT_TOLERANT_DEFAULT``
   *Boolean. Default: true.* When fault tolerance is enabled, whether it is on
   by default at run time.

Testing
-------

``TEST_PRODUCTION``
   *Identifier. Default: none.* The production used as the entry point by the
   generated self-test harness.

``TEST_EXTENSION``
   *String. Default: none.* The file extension the self-test harness uses to
   find test inputs.

Target-language options
-----------------------


Experimental and advanced
-------------------------

Settings whose names begin with ``X_`` are experimental and may change without
notice.

``X_JTB_PARSE_TREE``
   *Boolean. Default: false.* Experimental alternate parse-tree mode.

``X_SYNTHETIC_NODES_ENABLED``
   *Boolean. Default: false.* Experimental synthetic-node generation.

..
   Finally, I'd just as soon omit all the following.
   That you can write things like TOKEN_MANAGER_USES_PARSER
   as opposed to LEXER_USES_PARSER or SPECIAL_TOKENS_ARE_NODES instead
   of UNPARSED_TOKENS_ARE_NODES, these things were something of a
   courtesy for people coming from the old JavaCC or possibly from the
   short-lived FreeCC. But finally, all of these synonyms as
   "courtesies" just become confusing. And now that we have more
   exhaustive docs, I think it's better just to get rid of these things
   as the unnecessary cruft that they are.

  Deprecated and ignored
  ``JDK_TARGET``
   Deprecated and has no effect; setting it produces the warning *"Option
   JDK_TARGET is deprecated and currently has no effect. (It never did!)"*.

  ``NODE_CLASS``
   Accepted for backward compatibility but unused; use ``BASE_NODE_CLASS``
   instead.

  ``TOKEN_MANAGER_USES_PARSER``
   Accepted for backward compatibility but unused — the legacy name for the
   lexer was the "token manager". Use ``LEXER_USES_PARSER`` instead.
..
  The many configuration options of legacy JavaCC that CongoCC removed entirely —
  ``STATIC``, a global ``LOOKAHEAD``, the ambiguity-check options, and others —
  are listed with their replacements in :doc:`appendices/legacy`.
